---
title: On Self-Education
date: "2016-08-23:20:00.169Z"
path: "/on-self-education"
---

I get asked from time to time why I chose not to go to college. There are a lot
of rhetorical answers that I give – I didn't want debt, I wanted to be an
entrepreneur, I didn't want to spend another four years being told what to
think.

At the end of the day, though, you know what it really was? I hated studying for
the SATs. I considered it a waste of time. My entire life, I had been told that
I was really smart, that all I needed to do was "apply myself", and that if I
would just play the game for a few years, I'd be able to go anywhere and do
anything I wanted to. My parents spent a lot of money on preparatory classes,
getting me books, making sure that I'd be ready for when the time came – and at
the end of the day, I just didn't care.

Seriously, that was it. I just didn't care about taking tests. I had read some
articles online trying to justify my theory that college was worthless, and I
had looked at some of my heroes and seen that they were dropouts, but what drove
me to skip college was that I was tired of school.  At the end of high school, I
drove around with my dad and counted all of the different places I'd attended,
and my number (including day care) was twelve. Twelve schools in thirteen years,
and I had hated almost every one I'd attended.

I was bullied, picked on, and had made no more than two real friends in twelve
years of education. In elementary school, I was constantly sent to the
principal's office – the principal told me I "reminded her of her husband", and
told me that I was too smart for my own good and that she was punishing me to
teach me life lessons. I wasn't accepted into TAG, but "at least I was happy",
according to the math teacher.

In middle school, I got death threats for being the gay kid, was suspended for
talking back to teachers, and failed at home schooling because I played Second
Life all day and read philosophy instead of getting my work done. I read the
Communist Manifesto in sixth grade and focused on becoming a world revolutionary
instead of doing my geometry homework.

In high school, I spent my lunches doing Russian verb conjugations in the
bathroom because no one would sit near me at lunch. I was a foreign exchange
student in Germany, where I got in trouble constantly for skipping school, being
told I was a "know-it-all", and was eventually expelled because I met an
American exchange student in Italy who took the train to Frankfurt to meet me. I
had one friend, and I met her in my senior year at a charter school in the
middle of Nowhere, Texas.

So when the time came around to start focusing on which college I wanted to go
to, I didn't really care. I was very sure of myself intellectually, and also
very insecure socially – from seventh grade on, I had focused on learning
foreign languages, studying the humanities, and researching alternatives to
quantum mechanics instead of schmoozing up teachers for recommendation letters.

My teachers almost always ended up sending me to the library or giving me books
to keep me quiet. I was never sure what I was going to do when I left school.
All that I knew was that I wanted to get out and see the world for myself. And
that's what I did – I left home at 17 to try to move in with a New York
millionaire I met on OkCupid, and ended up moving around with different guys off
of Grindr before getting a job at Apple with $1000 in my pocket.

I did well at that, and I decided that I was bored, so I quit and moved to New
Hampshire to join the Free State Project and help the libertarian community. I
didn't want to interview for some random job, and I didn't want to wash dishes
to pay my way, so I decided to learn to program – I looked up the best coding
school I could find, moved to New York, and after three months, got a job in
Dallas on my first interview.

My point with all of this is that I'm a weirdo wherever I go – and that's not a
bad thing. I don't fit in among Objectivists, I don't fit in among libertarians,
the well-educated, the poorly educated, the freethinkers, the revolutionaries,
or any of the traditional communities I'm supposed to belong to. I feel
homophobic around other gay people, and I feel like watching Queer as Folk when
I'm around tons of straight people.

I'm a contrarian, and that's the best thing you can be in life – bullshit
transcends party lines, and hypocrisy abounds wherever you look today. I'm a
rebel who believes in objective law, a linguist who finds multiculturalism
boring, and a proud INTJ who thinks that Jungian psychology is pseudoscience.
I'm logical in a world that's illogical, and emotional in a world of "feelers"
who know only fear, not passion. I look for the best in people wherever I go,
and I'm content to be the outcast, because I care about finding what's correct,
not about belonging to a group.

Education is what matters, not what school you go to. It's about the results you
produce. When I was in school, I did what I wanted to do, and whatever I chose,
I was always told that I'd be successful if I did something else – if I obeyed,
I didn't seem sincere, and if I didn't, I was too sincere. I speak 26 languages
now, and everyone asks me, "How did you do that?" – and I realize that now that
the same people who ask that are the ones who would have made fun of me in
school for reading Soviet-era declassified documents instead of playing sports.

Now that I've actually gotten jobs and proven I didn't need college, everyone
tells me "Oh, I wish I'd done that, I have so much debt". Yet these were the
same people in school who told me that I had no chance without a degree, and
that "dreaming big was fine, but we have to live in reality".

Make your own reality. Educate yourself. If you have to pay $100,000 for it,
fine – but if you think the piece of paper you graduate with is a ticket to
success, it isn't. More importantly, it never was. Schooling has never been an
indicator of success, and getting in trouble in school doesn't mean you're going
to grow up to be Bill Gates. When you're told to "be weird" in order to achieve
success, it doesn't mean that you have to be insane – possessing a modicum of
common sense is weird enough in this world.

I don't know if I'll be successful in business. What I know is that I'm 19, I do
things my own way, and I've been most successful when I thought for myself
instead of accepting what someone else taught me without questioning it. I read,
I think, I do what I want to do, and when I fuck up, I lose money. But in the
end, I think I'll win – and if you want to be successful, stop reading articles
like this and go do what you think you should do. Think for yourself. Fight.
Win!
