---
title: Questions
date: "2017-11-30T13:20:00.169Z"
path: "/questions"
---

**What is the purpose of this blog?** Several possible answers come to mind, the
most pertinent of which is that I'm currently unemployed and wouldn't hire
anyone who didn't have a blog. I bounce back and forth between whether I want to
make this a technical blog, a tech blog, a cultural blog, or a political blog.
The world has enough of all four. I am not an expert in any one of these fields.
I aim, with this blog, to document my progress toward trying to become an expert
in all of them.

**What distinguishes this blog from other blogs?** Your average technical blog
is either not accessible at all, too accessible (read: code artisan), or just an
excuse for a LinkedIn recruiter to evangelize. This blog aims to be a kind of
Goldilocks – accessible enough for anyone with an IQ over 120 to read and gain
something from. I have no desire to turn this into another outlet to complain
about Trump or incite my readers to make charitable donations to deserving
causes, nor do I have any desire to end up featured on Medium as the newest
crypto-fascist on the block. This blog will be as heretical as appropriate, as
technical as pertinent, and as objective as possible – in short, the watchword
is "interesting", but not interesting enough to be lynched for.

**How often do I plan on writing?** Ideally, once a week. The size and content
of an entry will determine how long it takes for me to produce acceptable work,
but I hope stating this upfront will give me an incentive to write swiftly and
avoid making my own pig list.

**Why should I read this?** Quality content without a "Made with <3" sticker or
an exhortation to provide caffeine to the writer is hard to find nowadays –
entertainment, less so. I provide both, and I supply both my own wit and my own
caffeine.

That's all for today. I've spent something close to a month dicking around with
ideas for a "Hello world" post, and I figured it'd be wiser to just bite the
bullet and preemptively address a few of the questions your average person might
be thinking when they stumble on here. More to come!
