---
title: Bearded Hipsters Did Something Right, Finally
date: "2016-02-29:20:00.169Z"
path: "/bearded-hipsters-did-something-right"
---

Yeah, I know, this doesn't look like what I described, but who takes photos of
bearded hipsters in 2016? Yeah, I know, this doesn't look like what I described,
but who takes photos of bearded hipsters in 2016?

I have something of a love-hate relationship with Google. It's kind of like an
old flame that I see at work, spend my time rolling my eyes over, and then every
now and then think that I should get back together with – if Google were a
person, it'd be an intelligent, attractive, bearded hipster with zero fashion
sense who's constantly tinkering, changing jobs, and cheating on you with
someone else. In spite of all of the brilliance, the potential, and the beauty,
you get the feeling that their biggest export is their image. Every now and
then, I look at their Instagram, hear about the cool things they're doing, and
for a moment wish that I could work something out with them.

Then I buy an Android phone, and I remember why we broke up in the first place.

Maybe I'm reaching a bit here – I can't say I'm entirely unbiased, as a former
Apple employee. Google does a lot of amazing things, so I'm writing this article
as a form of penance and reminder to myself that Google creates things that
could change the world, and that even partially unfulfilled potential is better
than nothing.

But I digress. I was recently turned onto one of Google's open-source pet
projects called _TensorFlow_ by a friend, and I'm extremely intrigued by the
possibilities. TensorFlow is an AI engine Google uses internally for everything
from Google Translate to Google Photos. It's nowhere near perfect, by any means,
but it contains the key to the future of AI like nothing I've ever seen before.
It's used to generate smart replies, recognize patterns in images, translate
text without Wi-Fi, and recognize speech. As a linguist, and one who's
interested in developing language-learning software, I look at the few
algorithms that Google's made public so far and spend sleepless nights
conceptualizing how I could build something with this.

In short, it's exciting, to say the very least. The media is fascinated with AI
in the same way a dog is with car bumpers – they keep chasing after it as an
easy way to boost ratings, but there's not much serious treatment of the subject
in popular culture beyond "oh, I can talk to my phone now, and someday robots
will rise up and kill us all". "Hi, I'm here from the future, and I'm here to
murder you." "Hi, I'm here from the future, and I'm here to murder you."

It's election season in the U.S., and mass hysteria has gripped most of Western
civilization, as usual, so I'll take this opportunity to bring a bit of optimism
to the table. Americans are fascinated by and morbidly afraid of technology. We
love it, because it's beautiful and it makes our lives easier – and we hate it,
because most of us don't understand it. Public schools have dumbed people down
so much, particularly in mathematics and logic, that computers seem wholly
foreign to us. Movies like Terminator and shows like Battlestar Galactica have
made people believe that the Singularity spells the death of the human race.

They have a point.

No, I'm not advocating for the mass genocide of humanity – and no, I'm not
suggesting that we'll end up as living batteries, like The Matrix would suggest.
The kind of technology they're developing at Google will someday make the human
brain, as it stands, largely obsolete. And that's a wonderful thing. It doesn't
mean that we're all going to be left out in the dust to starve, and that we're
going to end up as the pets of some superior race. Slavery is profoundly
_illogical_ as well as economically impractical, and there are plenty of
superior power sources out there to be found besides the human body. We invented
computers to do our work for us – would a computer truly have any use for our
fragile bodies as workhorses?

The prospect of artificial intelligence, to those in the world who keep the old
faith of classical liberalism and individual sovereignty, is a ray of light in a
world where Armageddon is the press of a button away. If we can last just a
moment longer, we may yet see a world where the authoritarians are disarmed,
where we no longer have to argue that humans should be left free to live as they
see fit, and where the omnipresent threat of nuclear holocaust or world war can
be lifted.

Americans are haunted by a profound amount of racial guilt, and I suspect that
many of us would feel it only just if we were enslaved by some form of colonizer
and done away with. In many ways, our nation's identity has ceased to stand upon
the values of self-improvement and ambition, replaced with the view that life is
a zero-sum game where someone must be losing really badly if someone else is
winning. People will conceal their racist tendencies, because most of us can
still admit that inferior humans are humans nonetheless. We have no such
feelings toward computers – and thus, our naked fear, hatred, and even
admiration are much plainer to see.

There's no sharper contrast between the two facets of American society today
than in the wide gap between the tech industry and everything around it – the
kind of optimism and excitement you can see in something as simple as a webdev
startup is all but gone in the retail, manufacturing, and even scientific
sectors. Over the course of the past few decades, as growth has slowed around
the country, our government turned ever more bloated, and our currency's
dominant position becomes ever more volatile, Silicon Valley has increasingly
assumed the role of a beating heart, pumping blood into a decaying body and
struggling frantically to propel us forward.

If you ever talk to a Google employee, you'll learn very quickly just how
pessimistic most people in Silicon Valley are about the state of mankind – and
how desperate they are to live to see the age where computers take the reins of
society. Every now and then, you'll see an article come out about how Google or
Microsoft want to conquer the world; the quasi-religious zealotry of technocrats
aside, can you truly blame them for wanting to live in a world where Donald
Trump would have been reprocessed for stem cells instead of the likeliest
candidate to be elected?

Technology can be used for both good and evil – and a month ago, before I read
about the FBI's inability to break into an iPhone, I would have said that there
was definitely a chance for dystopia to come about before we reached the
Singularity. Yes, our military is already working on Ant-Men, Terminators, and
microarmies to quash resistance and "domestic terrorism". Yes, they want to get
rid of domestic encryption for non-party élites. And yes, they will fail, just
like they failed to get an order to unlock the iPhone – because however large
their budget is, this is the organization that locked itself out of a ~$300
phone over an unencrypted Wi-Fi connection.

People aren't afraid of robots conquering us and telling us what to do – if that
were the case, we would fear the prospect of dictatorship much more than we do
in the West today. People are afraid of _intelligence_, whether one is a
computer or a human, because intelligence is independence. We're not afraid that
the robots will kill us all. We're afraid that they wouldn't even think we were
important enough to do so.

I don't know if the guys at Google see AI as a chance for humanity to upgrade
and evolve into something new, if they just care about boosting ad revenue for
another quarter while they campaign for Bernie, or if they think that they'll be
able to control the future by being the guys who invent AI. But projects like
TensorFlow tell me that they're not such bad people, and that they understand
the potential of what they're building. What I do know is this – in a world
which abandoned art long ago to the Dadaists and politics to the authoritarians,
cool projects like TensorFlow are what keep humanity united for a final, brief
moment. And with any luck, it'll be just long enough for us to survive our first
step into a brave new world.
