---
title: The Value of Censorship
date: "2016-08-22:20:00.169Z"
path: "/value-of-censorship"
---

There is something seriously wrong with the state of the Internet today – with
the way people treat one another online, yes, but that's a symptom of a much
broader cultural problem. We don't understand the Internet. We use it every day,
and yet it remains a mystery to most people – its origins, its future, and most
importantly, its effects.

As evidence, I submit the ways that we handle social media – our problems, our
reactions to those problems, and the solutions we provide to those problems.
Westerners, and Americans in particular, have fetishized the Internet to such an
extent that it has become a cultural tradition unto itself to discuss it.

An example conversation about social media will go something like this: someone
will complain about popular social media sites like Facebook, Twitter, and
YouTube as having popularized online nastiness. A conversation will follow about
whether or not it's truly the fault of social media that people are so unkind –
there will be some lamenting about the state of the world today, and after an
appropriate amount of virtue-signaling from both sides, the conversation will
slowly turn into despondent bodily gestures (shrugging, "meh", and sad faces)
before one person makes some nasty parting remark about how humans have always
been nasty, but now we can record our behavior.

As with the vast majority of our common bipartisan arguments, there's a
staggering amount of bullshit on both sides. The Internet is not the cause of
our social problems, there has always been "yellow journalism" in the media, and
if you think YouTube commenters are a new phenomenon, take a look at the kind of
insults people had for one another just two hundred years ago.

A blog post is not the proper format to do an in-depth analysis of the
Internet's origins or to provide a comprehensive take on what I think the future
of social media will be – however, it is the correct format to provide a cursory
glance at some of the cultural and intellectual traditions that brought about
its present state, and to propose a new way of looking at some of our most
common problems online.

The word "media" is a pluralization of the Latin word medium, which we still use
today in in its original context as "vessel". The various media, social or
state-sponsored, are nothing more than carriers –as long as their content
remains unedited. Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram have all introduced
algorithmic news feeds in order to promote certain kinds of content; users never
see the actual algorithms themselves, and for the most part have very little say
in how their feeds are ordered.

As a company, Facebook has every right to promote whatever kind of behavior it
wants, to keep its algorithms private, and to re-order and re-tweak their
website however they please. The fact that they are a public company does not
mean that Facebook itself is public property or that the Bill of Rights applies
to it – the American Constitution was written to protect citizens' rights
against encroaching government, not to protect them from private corporations.

That being said, social media companies have engaged in sketchy behavior for
years. Facebook is the intellectual progenitor of many of the methods Twitter
has been notorious for in recent months (shadowbanning, censorship, working with
governments to silence political opposition), and it engages in legal and
ethical violations of its own Terms of Service on a daily basis.

So are Facebook and Twitter responsible for the actions of their users? They're
not directly responsible for what people post – but for all their talk of
promoting openness and transparency, their covert manipulation of what people
see and hear, as well as their recent focus on banning anyone who is accused of
"hate speech", mean that they play a role in shaping popular sentiment towards
any given issue.

People are still very much responsible for their actions, but when the media one
uses is actively designed and regulated to promote certain kinds of behavior
over others, they are no longer blameless. Social media companies like Facebook
and Twitter have campaigned for net neutrality and used "common carrier" laws to
escape regulatory bans and fines – at times it suits them to be considered a
business, and at other times, they prefer to be regulated as liberally as a
public utility like water or land.

Ironically, this kind of hypocrisy can also be reflected in users' habits and
behaviors – as a personal anecdote, I have had to explain to friends that I
don't want them commenting on things that I post if they're not of my political
persuasion. Since I am a libertarian and many of my friends are not, perhaps
it's not so ironic that they complain that "Facebook is a public forum" and that
I have no personal rights over my own page.

There have been calls to nationalize Facebook and other social media sites for
years, often by people of the same politics as Mark Zuckerberg and Jack Dorsey –
and they will only get louder as more and more of their behavior is more
publicly revealed, unless we address them head-on. News outlets everywhere have
complained for years about private companies clamoring against regulation; a
company is not a public threat when it clamors for its industry to be unshackled
and for less of their money to be seized by bureaucrats. Precisely the opposite.
When a private company begins to advocate for more regulation, that's when they
should be viewed as a menace.

Why? Facebook (and to a lesser extent, Twitter) has been able to thrive and
expand because Silicon Valley had escaped the government's attention and
corresponding regulatory weight for decades – a phenomenon which used to be the
standard, and not the exception, a century ago. However, now that Facebook is
the standard platform, wouldn't Mark Zuckerberg stand to benefit from becoming
the law instead of fighting against it?

This is the fundamental danger of a regulatory state exemplified – Facebook has
access to users' data, knows people's politics, and coöperates with governments
in exchange for legal protection. There is an economic incentive in Silicon
Valley, as in other industries, for leading industrialists to get cozy with the
law in order to maintain their dominant position. And what's even worse, they
have the means to promote policies and news that will influence politics to
their advantage.

Facebook's privacy policy states very specifically that it only yields data to
"lawful requests" – and that may very well be true, but if your particular brand
of politics involves increasing the scope of what may be considered the law as
well as advocating for ISPs and private companies to be regulated as public
utilities, that claim is disingenuous and immoral.

Rather than advocating that media outlets be regulated as public utilities, we
should do precisely the opposite – treat them as private utilities, and hold
them responsible for their actions. When Facebook and Twitter's "news curators"
promote defamatory stories claiming that Trump supporters instigate violence,
such as in San Jose, they should be held accountable for promoting libelous
accusations.

I said at the beginning of this article that people don't understand the
Internet – what I mean by that is that people do not understand its origins or
its nature, and therefore, they cannot understand how to deal with it properly.
The Internet is an anachronism, in many regards, in the regulatory age – its
openness stems from the fact that it is private, not public.

Internet service providers are private companies, not public utilities, which
means that they are dependent upon customers' choice to buy bandwidth from them.
If they do not perform at a level that their customers deem acceptable for their
prices, they go out of business, or competitors can swoop in and steal customers
with better quality or lower prices.

Were they public utilities, they would be maintained publicly, which means that
they would either be subsidized or directly maintained by tax dollars. Rather
than promoting open communication or stopping "toll lanes", ISPs would have no
incentive to do any promoting whatsoever – they would receive money regardless
of their output, by virtue of being owned by everyone. We already have a perfect
example of the difference in output between a local monopoly and a private
company in this industry – Comcast and Google Fiber. Of the two, which is more
desirable? Which is held in higher esteem by its customers?

This should be obvious to those with any inkling of common sense. The reasons
for opposing private enterprise are not based in logic, but in emotion – we fear
corporations' influence, we fear robber barons, and at a more reptilian level,
we fear that we will be left behind if others are free to compete.

However, rather than face our fears and biases, and take responsibility for
them, nationalizing corporations allows us to blame everyone and no one instead
of ourselves. In the case of the media, it gives moral sanction to two
generations which have enabled Fox News, CNN, and MSNBC to dominate political
discourse. In place of Johnny Carson, we now have John Oliver and Trevor Noah to
inform us – and if they have their way, a generation from now, we will be
watching a state-sponsored American News Network that will be instituted to
guarantee objectivity and reading Pravda to protect us from violent capitalist
rhetoric.

If we want to understand how to properly deal with the Internet, we need to
understand what it is – an abstraction. It is nothing more than the aggregate of
all human interaction through private providers. The Internet has flourished and
been an open marketplace for ideas precisely because of its foundation; it would
be an equivocation, however, to assume that because we "socialize" on the
Internet, we should socialize the Internet itself.

My generation has grown up completely disconnected, ironically, from the rest of
history in a day and age where we are constantly connected and where the history
of any particular intellectual issue can be found a few clicks away. We do not
have the context required to remember a time when the West believed in free
thought and free enterprise as a rule and not as an exception – but for those
who are willing to take a moment to question the road we are on now, regardless
of one's political orientation, the answers can easily be found.

Advocates of the State often say that government created the Internet – on a
private social platform, of course, and not using old ARPANET protocols. But
where the Department of Defense created it as a weapon, the private market
turned it into a way for us to communicate and share. The Internet is a
historically unprecedented phenomenon in the power it has given each individual
to learn and experience the world – and our ruling caste would see it weaponized
once again to rob us of our right to privacy and to live freely.

What is missed in all of this, however, is that the right to censor and to
discriminate is a private one, not a public one. We make choices about who we
want to associate with and who we listen to on a daily basis – it is only when
that behavior becomes backed by legalized force that that kind of behavior
becomes tyrannical. People have the right, within the bounds of their property,
to decide whether someone has the right to speak or not – similarly, people also
have the right to leave said property.

The final, and most important thing, that we misunderstand about the Internet is
the fact that its creation means that it cannot be controlled or censored
indefinitely – it is an aggregation of human activity, which means that as with
humans, there is only a certain extent to which one can truly "control" another
human being. Beyond that, and you destroy him. And my instinct is that if we
ever get to the point where the Internet is truly banned or destroyed outright,
and the veil comes off, people will find out just how little control Mark
Zuckerberg has over what people do.
