---
title: Material Design vs. UIKit
date: "2017-03-07T01:01:00.169Z"
path: "/material-design-vs-uikit"
---

I'm still something of a novice to design, but like a lot of beginners, I'm far
too opinionated for my own good – one of my weird habits is that I switch
platforms from iOS to Android and back (and even to Windows Phone sometimes).
Since I tend to wax philosophical about the differences between Apple and
Google, I jump around a lot according to which one I identify with most at the
moment.

Anyone who knows me knows I talk about the differences between the two
constantly, and I think it can drive people insane – to me, though, something as
small as the choice to implement a hamburger menu can contain a profound amount
of information and insight into how a company works and how they think about
their user. I think in terms of systems, and I like to analyze why companies
build the things they do.

One thing that I go back and forth on a lot – the namesake of this post – is
whether I prefer Google's approach or Apple's to design. Apple is a company
that's traditionally identified with good design and obsession over small
details, and Google is seen as more of an engineering company, but as time has
gone on, I've found that both companies make good decisions for the most part,
but have individual quirks that make them weird to deal with.

So, without further ado, here's my take on them both. Full disclosure: these are
my opinions intermixed with capital-f Facts, combined with more opinions. Take
them with a grain of salt.

**Material design**

Everything that you need to know about Material design, good and bad, can be
found in its origin story. Up until Android Lollipop, Google was a company where
design was a second-class citizen. It was a company of engineers, with
everything that that entails – prioritization of features, functionality, and
more backend stuff to push for product launches. When Android was first
launched, its UI was almost an afterthought – although Google had done a
ground-up redesign after seeing the iPhone launch, it still looked inconsistent
and unfinished, a sort of mixture of Blackberry and Palm with some glaring iOS
influence.

In the years following the launch of the first Android phones, though, you can
see the first steps toward a universal design that matched how Google looked on
the desktop, mainly in Gmail and Google Now.

The real shift came after iOS 7, though, which launched in 2013 – Apple made a
clean break with the skeuomorphism that defined its interfaces when Steve Jobs
was still CEO. Material design was presumably an answer to that, and an excuse
to rework Android to make it feel more user-friendly.

Ever since Material design came out, design has become a core part of Google in
a way it wasn't before, and I really love it. I love how consistent and clean it
feels, I love that it goes into incredible detail on how animations and
transitions should work, that it's opinionated on the height of buttons, and
that the overall experience is more akin to looking at a physics project than
just another UI toolkit. "Material" is conceived of and implemented as a kind of
physical object that has laws and properties it follows, and the idea of
defining content partially by the motion it has is really interesting.

I just wish it were more efficient! There are so many things it does really
well, but when I think about how much space things like the top navbar take up,
the overuse of hamburger menus, and the weird inconsistencies that have started
popping up ever since Matias Duarte (one of the creators) left the company, I
start going a little bit insane. Material design has this quintessential Google
quality of being eternally stuck somewhere between a pet project and a serious
tool. It's a wonderful concept, it's usually implemented well, but it just
drives me insane sometimes.

In many ways, if you look at the way Google treats Material design, it feels
like something that fits more with Apple’s philosophy of enforcing conformity to
a specific palette. Ironically, though, Apple is the more liberal of the two
when it comes to design – because they already had a history of enforcing strict
design standards before iOS 7, they didn’t have quite the same impetus to force
developers and manufacturers to adopt a standardized UI in the same way Google
did.

(As an aside – considering that the entire metaphor behind Material design is
paper, I find it hugely ironic that Google still hasn’t pushed the envelope much
in terms of introducing their own version of the Apple Pencil. Writing on an
Android tablet is still a laughably bad experience compared to using an iPad Pro
or a Microsoft Surface.)

**UIKit**

UIKit and AppKit, Apple’s UI framework for iOS and macOS apps respectively, are
very similar to Material design superficially, and fundamentally different in
terms of areas of emphasis. Where Material design focuses more on emphasizing
meaning through animation and motion, Apple’s frameworks emphasize providing
meaning through content itself.

Apple’s approach has traditionally emphasized removing as much of the UI from
the screen as possible and by tailoring UX to preexisting expectations (swiping
to navigate forward and backwards instead of back buttons, bottom navbars rather
than hamburger menus, and so on). They have much less of a cohesive framework
than a general set of principles they adhere to and expect from applications –
branding is marked by the experience itself rather than a uniquely Apple UI.

Not that there aren’t things about Apple’s designs that are uniquely their own –
the frosted glass and brushed metal look of the Mac interface, the rounded
square icons on iOS, the San Francisco font, among others – but the Apple
approach to design seems to emphasize a specific, predictable kind of UX rather
than a concrete UI itself. They give designers more of a rope to choke
themselves with, so to speak.

Because of this, a lot of applications in iOS feel fundamentally different from
one another in a way they don’t on Android devices – Apple has strict guidelines
on what they permit in applications, but UIKit isn’t nearly as emphatic about
how long animations should be, what fonts an application should use, or whether
users should emphasize menus over navbars.

iOS is starting to incorporate some aspects superficially similar to Material
design – the Music and News apps in iOS 10, for instance, are two examples of a
subtle but noticeable break from what preceded them. Both are relatively
service-oriented apps that have dynamic/algorithmically generated content, and
that seems to have provoked a greater focus on motion (and larger fonts to
increase semantic distinctions between sections).

**Conclusions**

I go back and forth on which one of the two I prefer, but in the end, I’d have
to say I prefer how iOS handles things – there’s something very neat about how
Material design incorporates a z-axis into its applications, but the same effect
can be handled (in my opinion) better on a hardware level with something like 3D
Touch – why create an app in 3D if you can’t actually interact with it in a 3D
manner?

What I've learned from looking at Google's apps on iOS is that Material design
is pretty unique to the Android/Chrome OS paradigm, at least as it stands today.
Certainly, Material design and iOS apps don't coexist well together – the Google
app suite on iOS seems strange to me because of the way it mixes and matches
navigation layouts (3D Touch and floating action buttons, for instance, are
really weird next to one another.)

I still have a lot to learn here, so I'll leave it at that and come back to the
subject once I learn a bit more.
